Slide 1: Hello, and thank you for coming to our presentation. We are going to talk about the development and the preliminary evaluation of our online module. This module is about the revision of content on corporate social responsibility to make it easier to understand for a lay audience, especially customers.
Slide 2: Here is an overview of the talk. I will start by saying a few words about corporate social responsibility (CSR for short) and the way in which it is communicated. I will then describe our module, what motivated it, how we developed it, and what are its main characteristics. Subsequently, I will present the findings of our preliminary evaluation and I will outline the implications and the next steps.
Slide 3: The concept of corporate social responsibility has been around for quite some time, so several definitions exist. What most of these definitions have in common is that they point to corporate social responsibility as a way of conducting business practices in an ethical way. For companies, this means considering and addressing the impact that they have on their employees, their stakeholders, the broader community, and the environment. In the past decade, there has been an increasing interest in CSR from all sorts of stakeholders.
Slide 4: In order to reach out to them, companies use different channels. So, for example, information on corporate social responsibility is found in reports, and not just stand-alone sustainability reports but also financial reports and integrated ones — which are reports that combine both financial and sustainability information. Other channels are social media and corporate websites. All of these channels are considered "company-controlled" because it is the company itself that decides what content goes on them. But, of course, the target audience and the language used in each of these channels varies. In particular, previous research has shown that reports tend to be long, quite detailed, and difficult to read, as they mainly address investors and experts. In contrast, the language and format of CSR content on websites and social media is more accessible and engaging. Therefore customers and lay people tend to prefer these channels.
Slide 5: Reporting on a company's CSR activities is a long and complex task. Reporting managers — who work closely with the communication team — need to collect information from various departments (such as, accounting, human resources, production and operations). Then they need to assemble all the data, make sure they are approved by the CEO, and that the final format and language enhance the user's experience. According to previous research, this process takes at least six months. The ability to adapt corporate communications to the target audience is appreciated in the workplace but, when it comes to CSR reporting, it seems that no training resources are available for employees who need to adapt this content for customers, especially by making it more engaging and easier to read. For this reason, we developed this online module that targets students of business, accounting and related disciplines as we expect that several of these students will end up working in companies and might be in charge of reporting strategies. We selected English as the language of the module for practical reasons and because English is, of course, the lingua franca of international business communication.
Slide 6: So, as I was saying, the goal of our module is to teach students about producing accessible CSR content for customers. To give students some concrete examples and a concrete task — as a frame of reference — we focused on the revision of CSR content in reports, which according to previous research is difficult to read. Specifically, we asked students to take this report content and to revise it in order to make it suitable for publication on a corporate website, where language and format tend to be more accessible and engaging (although it should be said that there is a lot of variability among companies). This online module is hosted by a platform called Calliope, which is a multilingual online writing centre and can accommodate different learning styles. I am going to explain why.
Slide 7: So, the module is divided into four main components, that you can see here, and they can be explored in a non-predefined way. If a student has a more active learning style, he or she can start their participation by going directly to the exercises or to the case study, and then check the theory in case of doubt. On the other hand, students with a more reflective style can spend more time on the theoretical section and then move to the practical part when they feel ready. It is important to point out that the theoretical part is divided into three different sections, which are: accessible communication, corporate social responsibility (or CSR), and revision of CSR content. The section on accessible communication revolves around five main principles, which are: vocabulary, sentence length and structure, cohesion, visual aspects, and relevance. The section on CSR focuses on the readability characteristics of the channels which provide the frame of reference for the revision task, that is reports and websites. Finally, the section on revision shows students how an expert would revise report content.
Slide 8: Our module can also accommodate different learning styles because each topic in the theory is available both in textual format and in audiovisual format. As you can see in this image, the students can either read or watch the theory. We are going to show you a short video of the theory and of some of its audiovisual components. I am choosing for instance the principle of cohesion. You can see the explanation in written format and also in video format. [...] I am going to show you the video for another principle, that is visual aspects.
Slide 9: With regard to our preliminary evaluation, we involved six participants (three experts and three students). The students were enrolled in a master programme in the Faculty of Business and Economics at the University of Antwerp. Among the experts, two of them were professional plain language writers and editors, while the third one was an expert in CSR reporting. Each participant took part in the module and answered usability questions on different aspects of the module, such as structure, content, strengths and weaknesses. Some of the questions were multiple-choice (from "Strongly agree" to "Strongly disagree") while other questions were open-ended.
Slide 10: For time reasons, in this presentation we are going to focus on answers from the experts. Their answers to our closed-ended questions were all on the "Agree" side of the scale. So, for example, they found the four different components of the module to be very well integrated. They found the language to be clear and the topic to be relevant. 
Slide 11: Only in two cases the experts chose the "Neither agree nor disagree" option. One expert selected this option in reference to the ease of movement between the module components. In the open-ended comments, he later specified that a navigation bar would have been helpful. Another expert selected "Neither agree nor disagree" in relation to the full online delivery of the module. It is worth pointing out that this participant has experience as lecturer so this experience might have determined her comment. 
Slide 12: With regard to the main strengths of the module, the expert participants particularly appreciated the availability of theoretical content in both text and video format. They found the practical exercises interesting and feasible, and they appreciated the general organisation of the module. 
Slide 13: As far as weaknesses are concerned, the participants highlighted the need to expand on some content. This is a very long comment but, to summarise, this participant is asking that we give even more space to the active voice when we talk about sentence length and structure, that we address more visual aspects such as the use of sub-headings and left alignment of the text, and that we mention software the automatically checks texts for readability level. 
Slide 14: Other weaknesses involved some wording of the exercises, the videos being sometimes too slow, and the target audience of the module. Specifically, according to this participant, some theoretical content and some exercises should be made more "student-friendly". This comment is particularly relevant because, as I was saying earlier, the intended target audience of this module are students of business and economics, who might have little knowledge of linguistics and language issues.
Slide 15: So, what are we going to do next? We are going to improve our module by addressing the comments of this preliminary evaluation. Then we are going to roll it out on a larger scale among students. As I was saying earlier, from a workplace point of view, it is very important that they acquire the ability to adapt their communications. We are going to share our findings with companies as well. They might be interested in this training resource since companies that are clear in their communications generate more trust in stakeholders. Of course, there is always the risk of so-called "greenwashing" but we hope that, when using plain language, there is less room for manipulation of content. This is also increasingly important as more and more customers rely on information about the sustainability of companies when deciding where and what to buy.
Slide 16: Finally, here are some interesting references.
Slide 17: Thank you for listening, and I will be around for the questions. 
